<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<meta name="generator" content="HTML Tidy for Windows (vers 14 February 2006), see www.w3.org">
<title></title>
</head>
<body>
1)Looking Westward a)Manifest Destiny i)Reflected pride of American nationalism + idealistic vision of social perfection that had fueled reform movements- US destined by God &amp; history- to expand over a vast area that included North America. ii)Extend liberty + US political system to others, but also racist justifications- superiority of “American” race, ppl of territories unfit for republican system iii)By 1840s idea of Manifest Destiny had spread thru “penny press” (mass audience). Almost all but not everyone embraced- Henry Clay feared tension b)Americans in Texas i)1820s Mexican govt encouraged American immigration into Texas hoping to strengthen territory’s economy and increase tax revenues, buffer against Indians, would prevent US expansion- 1824 Mex bill offered cheap land ii)Thousands took deal, land suitable for cotton, soon American population larger than Mexican. American intermediaries to Mex govt brought settlers- most famous Stephen Austin. Later attempts to stem US immigration failed c)Tensions Between the United States and Mexico i)Tension btwn US settlers and Mex govt grew b/c immigrants continued cultural + economic ties to US, also b/c desire to legalize slavery after it was outlawed in 1830 ii)Mid 1830s Mex General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna seized power as dictator- new law increased power of nat’l govt over state govts, Austin imprisoned. 1835 Mex sent more troops, 1836 Texans declared independence iii)Santa Anna led large army into TX, Americans unorganized and easily defeated (Battle of the Alamo in San Antonio). Then General Sam Houston defeated Mexicans 1836 at Battle of San Jacinto, the captured Santa Anna signed treaty making TX independent. [MXs living in TX called tejanos] iv)Texans wanted to be annexed by US, delegation sent to D.C. had expansionist support, but northerners feared large new slave state + empowering the south w/ more Congressional/electoral votes- incl. Andrew Jackson who feared sectional controversy, Pres Van Buren and Pres Harrison also ignored issue v)TX sought allies in Eur who wanted to check US power, Pres Tyler sought TX to reapply for statehood 1844, rejected by Senateissue in 1844 election d)Oregon i)Both GB and US claimed sovereignty over Oregon region. 1818 treaty allowed citizens equal access to area-“joint occupation” for 20 yrs ii)US interest grew 1820s/30s b/c desire to convert Indians and oppose Canadian Cath. Missionaries- native rejection Christianity=repudiating right to land iii)Large amt of Americans began emigrating to Oregon early 1840s, soon outnumbered GB’s settlers, destroyed native pop. Mid-1840s desire for annex. e)The Westward Migration i)Growth of TX and Oregon population part of greater movement of population westward 1840-1860. Southerners went mainly to TX, largest numbers from Old Northwest – majority sought mainly new economic opportunity ii)Some wanted riches after CA gold discovery 1848, others take advance of cheap land fed govt selling, others on religious mission (Mormons) f)Life on the Trail i)Most migrants gathered major depots in Iowa or MI, joined wagon trains led by hired guides. Main route Oregon Trail to CA + WA, others Santa Fe Trail ii)Trip very difficult, especially in mountain and desert terrain. Fear of conflict w/ Indians (although very little fighting occurred), trade developed w/ Natives 2)Expansion and War a)The Democrats and Expansion i)Two candidates for 1844 election Whig Henry Clay and the Democrat/former president Martin Van Buren. Clay chosen, but many Southern democrats supported TX annexation, chose stronger support James K. Polk ii)Polk able to win b/c wished to occupy Oregon and annex TX, thereby appealing to both northern and southern expansionists iii)Outgoing Pres John Tyler saw election as mandate for annexing TX, did so in 1845. Polk proposed Oregon border @ 49th parallel, GB refused, led to US cry “Fifty-four forty or fight!”. 1846 GB accepted treaty w/ border at 49th parallel b)The Southwest and California i)Oregon treaty accepted readily by Pres b/c tension growing in Southwest with Mex. After TX became state 1845 dispute over border- TX and Polk believed it to be at Rio Grande, sent Gen Zachary Taylor to protect from invasion ii)Part of disputed area was New Mexico where Mex had originally invited American settlers into. Interest in California growing as well as US fur traders gave way to merchants and farmers arriving. Settlers dreamed of annexation iii)Polk wanted California and New Mexico for US. At same time ordered Gen Taylor to TX, ordered navy seize CA ports if Mexico declared war c)The Mexican War i)Polk attempted diplomacy by sending special minister to Mex to purchase lands. When Polk heard MX rejected offer sent Gen. Taylor’s army from Nueces R to Rio Grande R January 1846 ii)May 1846 US declaration of war. Whig critics of war b/c thought Polk instigated, intensified as war cont and public aware of casualties and expense iii)American forces successful in capturing NE Mexico, Polk ordered offensive against New Mexico and California. Col Stephen Kearny captured Santa Fe, then aided US forces in CA’s “Bear Flag Revolution”, captured CA iv)When Mex refused to cede defeat Polk sent Gen Winfield Scott to capture Mexico City. After taking city new Mex govt took power that was willing to negotiate treaty. Some in US wanted to annex part of Mexico, but w/ election soon Polk wanted war ended quickly. Sent envoy Nicolas Trist for settlement v)Feb 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo agreed to where Mex ceded CA and NM to US and acknowledged Rio Grande boundary of TX. US agreed to pay Mex $15 million. Despite to Mex annexations Polk accepted treaty 3)The Sectional Debate a)Slavery and the Territories i)Rep David Wilmot’s “Wilmot Proviso”: prohibit slavery from territories acquired by Mex- failed Senate. Polk extended Missouri Compromise line to territory on West coast. Alternative- “popular sovereignty”- states decided ii)1848 election Polk didn’t run again. Dem candidate Lewis Cass, Whig General Zachary Taylor. Slavery opponents formed “Free-Soil” Party w/ Van Buren for pres. Showed inability of existing parties to contain slavery passions b)The California Gold Rush i)Taylor won 1848 election, pressure to resolve slavery in territories urgent b/c of events in CA- 1848 Gold Rush lead to dramatic increase in CA’s population, migrants known as “Forty-niners” mainly men ii)Gold Rush led to many Chinese migrants to Western US. Labor shortage in CA (due to ppl flocking to fold fields) created opportunities for ppl who needed work. Also led to exploitation of Natives, “Indian hunters” iii)Most didn’t find gold, but many sated in CA and swelled agricultural + urban populations. Population diverse- white Americans, Eurs, Chinese, Mexicans, free blacks, slaves of southern migrants—tension led territory to be a turbulent place, therefore pressure to create a stable and effective govt to bring order c)Rising Sectional Tensions i)Taylor believed statehood solution to territory issue b/c territories controlled by fed govt, but states govt could settle slave issue w/in own state ii)Taylor 1849 proposed CA (which had constitution banning slavery) and New Mexico apply for statehood, decide slavery w/in state. Congress refused b/c at time 15 free and 15 slave states existed, South feared admission of New states would upset balance, make South minority in Sen. Tempers rising d)The Compromise of 1850 i)Henry Clay proposed compromise to Congress in 1850- admitted CA as free state, new territorial govts w/o slave restrictions, new tough fugitive slave law ii)First phase of debating comp led by older voices of Clay, Calhoun, Webster and broad ideal of settling slave issue once and for all iii)After Clay proposal defeated, second phase of debate led by younger group: William Seward of NY opposed compromise, Jefferson Davis of MI saw slavery in terms of South’s economic self-interest, Stephen Douglas of IL iv)W/ death of Taylor in 1850 (who refused compromise until CA admitted), new Pres Millard Fillmore supported compromise, rallied N Whig support v)Douglas proposed Clay compromise split into smaller measured and voted on (difft sections could vote for measures that they supported), used govt bonds and railroad construction to gain support. Comp passed in September- less widespread agreement on ideals then victory of self-interest 4)The Crisis of the 1850s a)The Uneasy Truce i)1852 pres election candidates very sectional. Dem Franklin Pierce, Whig Gen Winfield Scott, Free-Soil John Hale. Whigs suffered from massive defection from antislavery members, Democrats won ii)Pres Pierce tried to ignore divisive issues, but N opposition to Fugitive Slave Act after 1850 as mobs prevented slave catchers in cities. S angered, alarmed b)“Young America” i)Pierce supported Democrat’s “Young America”- saw expansion of US democracy throughout world as way of diverting attention from slavery ii)Efforts to expand entangled in sectionalism- attempts to capture Cuba opposed by antislavery northerners who feared administration trying to bring new slave state to Union, south opposed acquiring Hawaii b/c prohibited slavery c)Slavery, Railroads, and the West i)1850s settlers began moving into plains to areas suitable for farming, dislodge Indians from reservations there. Settlement led to issue of railroad and slavery ii) RR used to solve communication problems btwn old states + areas W of Miss. R., movement for transcontinental RR. Disagreement over whether eastern terminus should be in North’s Chicago or in the South. Jefferson Davis organized Gadsden Purchase 1853 from Mex to make S route possible d)The Kansas-Nebraska Controversy i)Stephen Douglas 1854 proposed opening Nebraska Territory for white settlement (to clear Indians in way of possible transcont. RR from Chicago) ii)Nebraska North of Missouri Compromise line, therefore had to be free iii)To gain passage Douglas proposed dividing Nebraska in two (Nebraska and Kansas) and each would decide slavery by “popular sovereignty” (state legislature), repealed Missouri Compromise entirely iv)Kansas-Nebraska Act passed 1854 w/ Pres Pierce support. Had immediate, sweeping consequences: divided and destroyed Whig Party (disappeared by 1856), divided northern Democrats (disagreed w/ repealing Miss. Comp) v)Ppl in both parties opposed to bill formed Republican Party 1854 e)“Bleeding Kansas” i)Settlers from N + S settling Kansas, but for 1855 elections southerners from Missouri traveled to Kansas to vote. Pro-slavery legislature elected, legalized slavery. Free-state supporters in state formed own Const, applied statehood ii)Pro-slave forces burned down anti-slave govt, abolitionist John Brown then killed 5 pro-slave settlers (Pottawatomie Massacre). Led to armed warfare by armed bands, “Bleeding Kansas” became symbol of sectional controversy iii)1856 anti-slavery Charles Sumner of MA gave speech entitled “The Crime Against Kansas” critical of slavery defender Sen Butler of SC. Butler’s nephew Preston Brooks came to Sen, beat Sumner w/ cane- both became hero f)The Free-Soil Ideology i)Tension from economic, territorial interest, but also sectional vision of US ii)North believed in “free soil” + “free labor”. Slavery not so much immoral but wrong b/c threatened whites- every citizen had right to own property, control labor, access to opportunity. To them South closed, static society where slavery preserved entrenched aristocracy &amp; common white had no opportunity iii)North growing + prospering, S stagnant + rejecting individualism, progress. Believed S conspiring to extend slavery thru whole nation and thus destroy N capitalism, replace it with closed aristocracy of S- “slave power conspiracy” iv)This ideology @ heart of Repub Party. Committed to Union b/c growth + prosperity central to free-labor vision, breakup= smaller size+ less econ power g)The Pro-Slavery Argument i)Incompatible Southern ideology result of desire for security after Nat Turner 1831 uprising, lucrative nature of cotton economy into Deep South and expansion there, growth of Garrisonian abolition movement against S society ii)Intellectual defense of slavery begun by Professor Thomas Dew, others later gave ideology name The Pro-Slavery Argument- said that S should not apologize for slavery b/c was a good thing, slaved enjoyed better conditions than industrial workers in N, allowed for peace btwn races, helped nat’l econ iii)Also argued slavery good b/c basis of way S way of life, which was superior to any other. N greedy, destructive, factories horrific, cities crowded + immigrant filled- but S stable, orderly, protected worker welfare iv)Defense also on biological inferiority of blacks, inherently unfit to care for themselves and be citizens. Clergy also gave religious + biblical justification h)Buchanan and Depression i)In 1856 pres election Dems wanted candidate unassociated w/ “Bleeding Kansas” so chose James Buchanan, Repubs chose John Fremont (platform against Kansas-Nebraska Act and of Whiggish internal improvements reflecting N economic aspirations), Know-Nothings chose Millard Fillmore ii)Buchanan won, but proved indecisive at critical moment in history. After taking office financial panic + depression hit country iii)In N Repubs strengthened b/c manufacturers, workers, farmers joined--depression seen as result of unsound policies of southern Dem administrations i)The Dred Scott Decision i)March 1857 Supreme Court ruled in Dred Scott v Sandford- Scott was slave who after masters death sued widow for freedom on grounds that master had moved residence to a free state, but John Sanford (brother of deceased owner, Sup C. misspelled name) claimed ownership of Scott ii)Defeat for antislavery movement. Supreme Court had multiple decisions, Chief Justice Roger Taney: Scott could not bring suit in fed court b/c was not a citizen, blacks had virtually no rights under Const, slaves property &amp; 5th Amendment forbid taking property w/o “due process” and therefore Congress had no authority to pass law depriving persons of slave property in territories (thereby ruling Missouri Compromise had been unconstitutional) iii)Did not challenge rights of state to limit slavery, but fed govt now powerless j)Deadlock Over Kansas i)Pres Buchanan endorsed Dred Scott decision, to solve Kansas problem supported admission to Union as slave state. 1857 new KS Const legalized slavery, but election of new legislature saw antislavery majority who put Const to ppl to vote on- widely rejected ii)1858 Buchanan pressured Congress to admit it as slave state anyway but Cong rejected, compromise allowed KS to vote on Const again—rejected again iii)1861, after sever S states had already seceded, KS entered Union as free state k)The Emergence of Lincoln i)In 1858 Congressional elections Repub Abraham Lincoln ran against famed Dem Stephen Douglas. Lincoln-Douglas debates attracted attention ii)Lincoln’s attacks on slavery prominent- argued if nation didn’t accept blacks had human rights then it could accept other groups such as immigrant laborers could be deprived of rights too. Also, extension of slavery in territories would lead to lost opportunity for betterment by poor white laborers iii)Lincoln opposed slavery but not abolitionist b/c did not see easy alternative to slavery in areas where it existed. Prevent spread of slavery to territories, trust institution would gradually die out in areas where it existed iv)Douglas won but Lincoln gained following. Dems lost maj in House, kept Sen l)John Brown’s Raid i)1859 antislavery zealot from KS John Brown led followers to capture fort in Harpers Ferry VA hoping to lead slave rebellion. Uprising never occurred, Brown surrendered, tried for treason by VA and hanged ii)Convinced white southerners that they could not live safely in Union, believed raid supported by Repub party and that North now wanted slave insurrection m)The Election of Lincoln i)In Pres election of 1860 Dems torn btwn southerners (who demanded strong endorsement of slavery) &amp; westerners (who supported popular sovereignty) ii)After popular sovereignty endorsed by convention southern states walked out, eventually nominated John Breckinridge of KY, rest chose Stephen Douglas iii)Still others formed Constitutional Union Party w/ John Bell as candidate- endorsed Union but remained silent regarding slavery iv)Republicans tried to broaden appeal to earn majority in North who feared S blocking its economic interests. Platform endorsed high tariff, internal improvements, homestead bill, Pacific railroad, popular sovereignty but Congress nor territory legislatures could legalize slavery in territories v)Repubs chose Abraham Lincoln as nominee b/c moderate positions on slavery, relative obscurity, and western origins to attract votes from region vi)Lincoln won presidency w/ majority of electoral votes but only 2/5 of popular vote but failed to win maj in Congress vii)Election of Lincoln final signal for many southerners that their position in Union hopeless, within weeks process of disunion began 1. John L. O’Sullivan 2. “penny press” 3. Antonio de Santa Anna 4. San Jacinto 5. Oregon Trail 6. “re-occupation” and “re- annexation” 7. “Fifty-four forty or fight” 8. John C. Fremont 9. Zachary Taylor 10. Stephen W. Kearny 11. General Winfield Scott 12. Nicholas Trist 13. “All Mexico” 14. Lewis Cass 15. Free-Soil Party 16. Forty-niners 17. William H. Seward 18. Millard Fillmore 19. “omnibus bill” 20. Franklin Pierce 21. Ostend Manifesto 22. Gadsden Purchase 23. Pottawatomie Massacre 24. “The Crime Against Kansas” 25. Preston Brooks 26. “slave power conspiracy” 27. “positive good” thesis 28. John C. Breckinridge 29. John Bell
</body>
</html>
