<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<meta name="generator" content="HTML Tidy for Windows (vers 14 February 2006), see www.w3.org">
<title></title>
</head>
<body>
1. “Triple Entente” 2. “Triple Alliance” 3. Bosnia &amp; Serbia 4. Ottoman Empire 5. S.S. Lusitania 6. Zimmerman telegram 7. Nikolai Lenin 8. Selective Service Act 9. American Expeditionary Force 10. John J. Pershing 11. Meuse-Argonne offensive 12. Mustard gas 13. Liberty Bonds 14. War Industries Board 15. Ludlow Massacre 16. “The Great Migration “ 17. Women’s Peace Party 18. George Creel &amp; the Committee on Public Information (CPI) 19. Espionage Act (1917) 20. Sedition Act 1918) 21. Eugene V. Debs 22. The Fourteen Points 23. Bolshevik regime 24. David Lloyd George 25. George Clemenceau 26. “White” Russians 27. League of Nations 28. “irreconcilables” 29. Henry Cabot Lodge 30. Strikes of 1919 31. Race Riots of 1919 32. Marcus Garvey 33. Comintern 34. A. Mitchell Palmer &amp; The Palmer Raids 35. Sacco-Vanzetti trial 36. “normalcy” 1)The Road to War a)The Collapse of the European Peace i)Eur divided into alliances- “Triple Entente” of GB, France, Russia &amp; “Triple Alliance” of Germany, Austria-Hungary, Italy (GB-German tension notable) ii)After June 1914 assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand by Serbs, A-H invaded Serbia who called on Russian help- b/c alliances other nations entered b)Wilson’s Neutrality i)1914 Wilson urged neutrality but many Americans sympathized w/ certain nations (German + Irish immigrants=Central, but most ppl= GB+Allies) ii)Strong US-GB economic ties + blockade of Central Powers led US to continue trade w/ GB , shun trade w/ Central nations- “arsenal of Allies” iii)Germany began using submarine warfare 1915 to combat GB naval domination; 1915 sinking of Lusitania and 1916 Sussex sinking led Wilson to call on Germans to recognize rights of neutrals- Germans relented and stopped attacking merchant ships to stop US entrance into war c)Preparedness vs Pacifism i)Wilson did not intervene for either side b/c of re-election + domestic division ii)Economic + militarily preparations debated by pacifists and interventionists. However, by 1916 military armament largely under way iii)Wilson won extremely close 1916 b/c of association w/ ability to keep US independent, although Dems barely held on to Congressional majorities d)A War for Democracy i)After election Wilson wanted country unified and justified if to enter war, should fight to create new progressive world order + not for material gains ii)January 1917 Germany began offensive + continuation of unrestricted submarine warfare to defeat Allies before US entrance; February Zimmerman Telegram urged Mex to join w/ Germany (increased public sentiment toward war); March Russian Revolution toppled czar for republican govt iii)April 1917 US officially declared war on side of Allies 2)“War Without Stint” a)Entering the War i)Immediately w/ US entrance Allied navy able to dramatically reduce sinking’s in troop + supply convoys ii)1917 withdrawal of Russian forces after Bolshevik Revolution (Lenin) led Germans to put resources on Western Front, Allies needed US ground troops b)The American Expeditionary Force i)US army too small to supply needed troops- April 1917 Wilson urged passage of Selective Service Act to draft soldiers into American Expeditionary Force ii)AEF was diverse-- women served as auxiliaries in non-combat roles; African-American soldiers served in segregated units or had menial roles c)The Military Struggle i)US ground forces insignificant until spring 1918; AEF under Gen John Pershing maintained command structure independent from other Allies ii)US forced tipped stalemate + balance of power to Allies--- June 1918 helped repel German offensive at Chateau-Thierry iii)Beginning Sept US forced fighting in Argonne Forest (as part of Allied Meuse-Argonne Offensive); pushed Germans back + cut off supply routes iv)11/11/1918 Great War ended w/ Allies on German border d)The New Technology of Warfare i)New military weapons + tactics more deadly (tanks, machine guns, trenches, chemical weapons). Logistics and materials transport gained increased importance. Rise of planes, dreadnought battleships, submarines ii)Casualties extremely high for war (British lost 1 million, Germany 2 million); even victors overwhelmed by sheer magnitude of deaths 3)The War and American Society a)Organizing the Economy for War i)US appropriated $32 billion for war- to raise money sold “Liberty Bonds” to public &amp; put new graduated taxes on income + inheritance ii)To organize economy Wilson created Council of National Defense; but emphasis Civilian Advisory Commission tasked w/ mobilizing at local level iii)CND members urged “scientific management” + centralization, proposed dividing economy based on function and not geography w/ “war boards” coordinating efforts in each sector iv)War Industries Board oversaw purchase of military supplies, under Bernard Baruch organized factories, set prices, and distributed needed materials. Instead of restricting profits, govt entered alliance w/ private sector b)Labor and the War i)National War Labor Board pressured industry for concessions to workers (8-hour day, living standards, collective bargaining) but workers forced to forgo strikes. Right before war Ludlow Massacre when striking miners killed c)Economic and Social Results of the War i)Economic boom during period from Eur demand, later US need. Industrial production expanded, opportunities for female + minorities b/c of men at war ii)War years saw “Great Migration” of hundreds of thousands of African- Americans from rural South to northern industrial cities. S poverty + racism and appeal of N factory jobs + freedom led to movement. Growing black communities near white neighborhoods sometimes resulted in race riots iii)Women took higher-paying industrial jobs that were unavailable in peace time 4)The Search for Social Unity a)The Peace Movement i)Public sentiment divided over US involvement in war—peace movement supported by German Americans, Irish who opposed GB, religious pacifists, intellectuals and leftist groups ii) Peaces support also from women’s movement- maternal pacifism b)Selling the War and Suppressing Dissent i)Once America intervened most of country became patriotic and supportive of troops. Religious revivalism also became source of support for war ii)Govt concerned about minority in opposition to war, believed victory possible only thru united public opinion Committee on Public Information under George Creel distributed pro-war propaganda—portrayals of savage Germans iii)Espionage Act of 1917 gave govt power to punish spies and obstructers of war effort, respond to reports of disloyalty. Sabotage Act and Sedition Act of 1918 made any public expression of opposition illegal- targeted socialist groups iv)Local govts and private citizen groups worked to repress opposition- “vigilante mob” discipline, also American Protective League w/ thousands of members who spied on neighbors to ensure unity of opinion in communities v)Repressive efforts targeted socialists and labor leaders, but also largely immigrants (Germans, Irish, Jews)- “Loyalist” Americans called for “100 Percent Americanism”. German Americans faced fierce discrimination 5)The Search for a New World Order a)The Fourteen Points i)Wilson’s Fourteen Poitns addressed three areas: self-determination and new boundaries; new international governance laws including freedom of the seas, end to secret treaties, free trade, determination of colonial claims; league of nations to implement points and resolve future disagreements ii)Fourteen Points also effort to combat Bolshevik (Lenin) aspiration to lead new postwar world order—US established itself thru the points b)Early Obstacles i)Wilson hoped popular support would help garner Allied support for Points, ii)However, most Allies so decimated by war and so bitter against Germany that they did not with to be generous GB Prime Minister Lloyd George and French Premier Georges Clemenceau determined to gain compensation iii)At home Wilson + Dems lost control of Congress to Repub majorities in 1918 election, domestic economic issues + Repub opposition weakened his position c)The Paris Peace Conference i)Big Four nations to negotiate treaty were GB, France, Italy, US ii)Wilson’s idealism met by effort by other nations to improve own lot, concerns about eastern Europe and communism (US did not recognize Bolshevik govt until 1933). His economic + strategic demands suffered from conflict w/ cultural nationalism iii)Wilson initially rejected reparations from Central Powers, but Allies forced him to accept idea in order to keep Germany weak + unable to threaten Eur iv)Wilson was successful and placing some colonies under League of Nations “mandate” system, created Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia v)Allies accepted “covenant” of League of Nations-- to meet to resolve disputes + protect peace, Wilson believed problems w/ treaty could be fixed by League d)The Ratification Battle i)Americans used to isolation questioned international commitment, Wilson refused to compromise or modify League too much—when Treaty of Versailles introduced by Wilson to Senate in 1919 ii)Opposition lead by Repub Irreconcilables who wanted isolation, but also by personal hatred of Sen Henry Cabot Lodge for Wilson—wanted to delay so public approval would subside, make treaty issue in 1920 election e)Wilson’s Ordeal i)Wilson began traveling country to gain public support for treaty. The traveling and speaking tour exacerbated his already bad health and he suffered stroke that rendered him incapable for weeks ii)Condition made his views of world in moral terms and loathing for compromise stronger. When Treaty sent to Sen for approval w/ “reservations” (amendments) attached, Wilson urged Dems to vote against it- both amended treaty and original failed to reach 2/3 majority to be ratified 6)A Society in Turmoil a)Industry and Labor i)After war govt began cancelling contracts. War boom continued for short while b/c of foreign demand + deficit spending ii)In 1920 bubble burst—GDP decreased, inflation and unemployment rose iii)In postwar env’t 1919 management sought to rescind worker rights that they had been forced to grant during war—use of union strikes increased to combat these moves: Boston Police Strike, great Steel Worker’s Strike failure b)The Demands of African-Americans i)Retruning blacks from war wanted social reward+ rights for service, black factory workers from war wanted to retain economic gains they had made ii)Racial tension increased as retrurning whites displaced black workers- contributed to large 1919 Chicago race riots iii)Marcus Garvey’s ideas of Black Nationalism gained popularity among blacks- advocated embracing heritage + return to Africa, reject white assimilation c)The Red Scare i)Industrial problems, racial violence, dissent, creation of Communist International in 1919 by Soviets to spread revolution, also bombings in US by radicals fueled middle class fears of instability + radicalism ii)Growing movement to fight radicalism + embrace “100 Percent Americanism” Red Scare iii)Antiradicals saw any instability or protest as radical threat; Jan 1920 Attorney General A Mitchell Palmer conducted nationwide raids in radical crackdown iv)1920 Sacco and Vanzetti murder trial showed American bias toward perceived radicals (they had been immigrant anarchists); they were executed in 1927 d)The Retreat from Idealism i)Passage of 19th Amendment in 1920 (to give women suffrage) marked end of reform era—due to economic problems, labor unrest, and antiradicalism that all lead to sense of disillusionment ii)1920 Presidential election pitted idealists Dem James Cox (and VP Franklin Roosevelt) against conservative Republican Warren Harding who promised “return to normalcy”—Harding won by a large margin iii)Election a repudiation of League of Nation and postwar order of democratic ideals
</body>
</html>
