<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
  <head>
    <meta name="generator" content="HTML Tidy for Windows (vers 14 February 2006), see www.w3.org">
    <title></title>
  </head>
  <body>
    1. Richard Nixon 2. Lee Harvey Oswald 3. Warren Commission 4. Barry Goldwater 5. Robert Weaver 6. Sit-in 7. Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) 8. Congress of Racial Equality (CORE) 9. Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC) 10. George Wallace 11. “affirmative action” 12. “I have a dream” 13. de jure and de facto segregation 14. Black Panthers 15. Malcolm X 16. Green Berets 17. “Alliance for Progress” 18. Peace Corps 19. Berlin Wall 20. Nikita Khrushchev 21. Ho Chi Minh 22. Viet Cong/National Liberation Front (NLF) 23. Dean Rusk 24. Robert McNamara 25. Gulf of Tonkin Resolution 26. Ho Chi Minh Trail 27. Eugene McCarthy 28. Hubert Humphrey 29. “silent majority”/”middle America” Expanding the Liberal State John Kennedy ·The campaign of 1960 produced two young candidates who claimed to offer the nation active leadership. ·The Republican nomination went almost uncontested to Vice President Richard Nixon, who promised moderate reform. ·John Fitzgerald Kennedy was the son of the wealthy powerful, and highly controversial Joseph P. Kennedy, former American ambassador to Britain. ·He premised his campaign, he said, “on the single assumption that the American people are uneasy at the present drift in our national course”. ·Kennedy had campaigned promising a set of domestic reforms more ambitious than any since the New Deal, a program he described as the “New Frontier”. ·Kennedy had traveled to Texas with his wife and Vice President Lyndon Johnson for a series of=2 0political appearances. ·While the presidential motorcade rode slowly through the streets of Dallas, shots rang out. ·He got shot in the throat and head, he was rushed to a hospital, where minutes later he was pronounced dead. ·Lee Harvey Oswald, was arrested for the crime later that day, and then mysteriously murdered by a Dallas nightclub owner, Jack Ruby, 2 days later as he was being moved from one jail to another. ·In years later years many Americans came to believe that the Warren Commission report had ignored evidence of a wider conspiracy behind the murders. Lyndon Johnson ·The Kennedy assassination was a national trauma-a defining event for almost everyone old enough to be aware of it. ·Johnson was a native of the poor “hill country” of west Texas and had risen to become majority leader of the U.S. Senate by dint of extraordinary, even obsessive, effort and ambition. ·Between 1963 and 1966, he compiled the most impressive legislative record of any president since Franklin Roosevelt. ·He created the “Great Society”. ·Record Democratic majorities in both houses of Congress, any of whose members had been swept into office=2 0only because of the margin of Johnson’s victory, ensured that the president would be able to fulfill many of his goals. The Assault on Poverty ·The most important welfare program was Medicare: a program to provide federal aid to the elderly for medical expenses. ·Its enactment in 1965 came at the end of a bitter, 20 year debate between those who believed in the concept of national health assistance and those who denounced it as “socialized medicine”. ·Medicare benefits available to all elderly Americans, regardless of need. ·Medicare simply shifted responsibility for paying those fees from the patient to the government. ·The centerpiece of this “war on poverty”, as Johnson called it, was the Office of economic Opportunity, which created an array of new educational, employment, housing, and health-care programs. ·The Community Action programs provided jobs for many poor people and gave them valuable experience in administrative and political work. ·The OEO spent nearly $3 billion during its first two years of existence, and it helped reduce poverty in some areas. Cities, Schools, and Immigration ·The Housing Act of 1961 offered $4.9 billion in federal grants to cities for the preservation of open spaces, the development of mass transit systems, and the subsidization of middle income housing. ·In 1966, Johnson established a new cabinet agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development. ·Johnson also inaugurated the Model Cites program, which offered federal subsidies for urban redevelopment pilot programs. ·Johnson managed to circumvent both objections with the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 and a series of subsequent measures. ·Total federal expenditures for education and technical training rose from $5 billion to $12 billion between 1964 and 1967. ·The Immigration Act of 1965 maintained a strict limit on the number of newcomers admitted to the country each year (170,000), but it eliminated the “national origins” system established in the 1920s, which gave preference to immigrants from northern Europe over those from other parts of the world. Legacies of the Great Society ·In 1964, Johnson managed to win passage of the $11.5 bill ion tax cut that Kennedy had first proposed in 1962. ·The cut increased the federal deficit, but substantial economic growth over the next several years made up for much of the revenue initially lost. ·The high costs of the Great Society programs, the deficiencies and failures of many of them, and the inability of the government to find the revenues to pay for them contributed to a growing disillusionment in later years with the idea of federal efforts to solve social problems. The Battle for the Racial Equality Expanding Protests ·John Kennedy had long been vaguely sympathetic to the cause of racial justice, but he was hardly a committed crusader. ·In February 1960, black college students in Greensboro, North Carolina, staged a sit-in at a segregated Woolworth’s lunch counter, and in the following weeks, similar demonstrations spread throughout the South, forcing many merchants to integrate their facilities. ·The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, worked to keep the spirit of resistance alive. ·In 1961, an interracial group of students, working with the Congress of Racial Equality, began what t hey called “freedom rides”. ·Traveling by bus throughout the South, the freedom riders tried to force the desegregation of bus stations. ·SNCC workers began fanning out through black communities and even into remote rural areas to encourage blacks to challenge the obstacles to voting that the Jim Crow laws had created and that powerful social custom sustained. ·In April, Martin Luther King, Jr., helped launch a series of nonviolent demonstrations in Birmingham, Alabama, a city unsurpassed in the strength of its commitment to segregation. ·Medgar Evers was murdered in Mississippi. A National Commitment ·To generate support for the legislation, and to dramatize the power of the growing movement, ore than 200,000 demonstrators marched down the Mall in Washington, D.C., in August 1963 and gathered before the Lincoln Memorial for the greatest civil rights demonstration in the nation’s history. ·Early in 1964, after Johnson applied both public and private pressure, supporters of the measure finally mustered the two-thirds majority necessary to close debate and end a filibuster by southern senators; and the Senate passed the most comprehensive civil rights bill in the nation’s history. The Battle for Voting Rights ·During the summer of 1964, thousands of civil rights workers, black and white, northern and southern, spread out through the South, but primarily in Mississippi. ·The campaign was known as “freedom summer”, and it produced a violent response from some southern whites. ·The “freedom summer” also produced the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, and integrated alternative to the regular state party organization. ·It permitted the MFDP to be seated as observers, with promises of party reforms later on, while the regular party retained its official standing. ·A year later, in March 1965, King helped organize a major demonstration in Selma, Alabama to press the demand for the right of blacks to register to vote. ·Two northern whites participating in the Selma march were murdered in the course of the effort there- one, a minister, beaten to death in the streets of the town; the other, a Detroit housewife, shot as she drove along a highway at night with a black passenger in her car. ·The Civil Rights Act of 1965, better known as the Voting Rights Act, which provided federal protection to blacks attempting to exercise their right to vote. The Changing Movement ·By 1966, 69 percent of American blacks were living in metropolitan areas and 45 percent outside the South. ·Well over half of all American non-whites lived in poverty at the beginning of the 1960s; black unemployment was twice that of whites. ·Over the next decade, affirmative action guidelines gradually extended to virtually all institutions doing business with or receiving funds from the federal government- and to many others as well. ·Organizers of the Chicago campaign hoped to direct national attention to housing and employment discrimination in northern industrial cities in much the same way similar campaigns had exposed legal racism in the South. Urban Violence ·Well before the Chicago campaign, the problem of urban poverty had thrust itself into national attention when violence broke out in black neighborhoods in major cities. ·The first large race riot since the end of World War II occurred the following summer in the Watts section of Los Angeles. ·The incident triggered a storm of anger and a week of violence. ·34 people died during the Watts uprising, which was eventually quelled by the National Guard; 28 of the dead were black. ·Televised reports of the violence alarmed millions of Americans and created both a new sense of urgency and a growing sense of doubt among many of those whites who had embraced the cause of racial justice only a few years before. ·A special Commission on Civil Disorders, created by the president in response to the disturbances, issued a celebrated report in the spring of 1968 recommending massive spending to eliminate the abysmal conditions of the ghettoes. Black Power ·Disillusioned with the ideal of peaceful change in cooperation with whites, an increasing number of African Americans were turning to a new approach to the racial issue: the philosophy of “black power”. ·The most enduring impact of the black-power ideology was a social and psychological one: instilling racial pride in African Americans, who lived in a society whose dominant culture generally portrayed blacks as inferior to whites. ·It encouraged the growth of black studies in schools and universities. ·Traditional black organizations that had emphasized cooperation=2 0with sympathetic whites- groups such as the NAACP, the Urban League, and King’s Southern Christian Leadership Conferencenow faced competition from more radical groups. ·In Oakland, California the Black Panther Party promised to defend black rights even if that required violence. Malcolm X ·In Detroit, a once-obscure black nationalist group, the Nation of Islam, gained new prominence. ·Founded in 1931 by Wali Farad and Elijah Poole, the movement taught blacks to take responsibility for their own lives, to be disciplined, to live by strict codes of behavior, and to reject any dependence on whites. ·Malcolm became one of the movement’s most influential spokesmen, particularly among younger blacks, as a result of his intelligence, his oratorical skills, and his harsh, uncompromising opposition to all forms of racism and oppression. ·He did not advocate violence, but he insisted that black people had the right to defend themselves, violently if necessary from those who assaulted them. ·Malcolm died in 1965 when black gunmen, presumably under orders from rivals within the Nation of Islam, assassinated him in New York. "Flexible Response and the Cold War" Diversifying Foreign Policy · The Kennedy administration entered office convinced that the United States needed to be able to counter communist aggression in more flexible ways than the atomic weapons-oriented defense strategy of the Eisenhower years permitted. · Kennedy was unsatisfied with the nation’s ability to meet communist threats in “emerging areas” of the Third World- the areas in which, Kennedy believed, the real struggle against communism would be waged in the future. · Kennedy also inaugurated the Agency for International Development to coordinate foreign aid. · The Peace Corps, sent young American volunteers abroad to work in developing areas. · On April 17, 1961, with the approval of the new president, 2,000 of the armed exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba, expecting first American air support and then a spontaneous uprising by the Cuban people on their behalf. Confrontations with the Soviet Union · In the grim aft ermath of the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy traveled to Vienna in June 1961 for his first meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. · Before dawn on August 13, 1961, the East German government, complying with directives from Moscow, constructed a wall between East and West Berlin. · For nearly 30 years the Berlin Wall served as the most potent physical symbol of the conflict between the communist and noncommunist worlds. · On October 14, aerial reconnaissance photos produced clear evidence that the Soviets were constructing sites on the island for offensive nuclear weapons. · On October 22, he ordered a naval and air blockade around Cuba, a “quarantine” against all offensive weapons. Johnson and the World · Lyndon Johnson entered the presidency lacking even John Kennedy’s limited prior experience with international affairs. · A 1961 assassination had toppled the repressive dictatorship of General Rafael Trujillo, and for the next four years various fascinations in the country had struggled for dominance. · In the spring of 1965, a conservative military regime began to collapse in the face of a revolt by a broad range of groups on behalf of the left-wing nationalist Juan Bosch. · Only after a conservative candidate defeated Bosch in a 1966 election were the forces withdrawn. The Agony of Vietnam The First Indochina War · Vietnam had a long history both as an independent kingdom and major power in its region, and as a subjugated province of China; its people were both proud of their past glory and painfully aware of their many years of subjugation. · In the mi-19th century, Vietnam became a colony of France. · The French wanted to reassert their control over Vietnam. · In the fall of 1945, after the collapse of Japan and before the western powers had time to return, the Vietminh declared Vietnam an independent nation and set up a nationalist government under Ho Chi Mihn in Hanoi. · For the next 4 years, during what has become known as the First Indochina War, Truman and then Eisenhower continued to support the French military campaign against the Vietminh; by 1954, by some calculations, the United States was paying 80 percent of France’s war costs. Geneva and the Two Vietnams · An international conference at Geneva, planned many months before to settle the Korean dispute and other controversies, now took up the fate of Vietnam as well. · Secretary of State Dulles, who reluctantly attended but left early; the United States was not a party to the accords. · Vietnam would be temporarily portioned along the 17th parallel, with the Vietminh in control of North Vietnam, and a pro-western regime in control of the South. America and Diem · The U.S almost immediately stepped into the vacuum and became the principal benefactor of the new government in the South, led by NGO Dihn Diem. · The Buddhist crisis was alarming and embarrassing to the Kennedy Administration. From Aid to Intervention · Lyndon Johnson thus inherited what was already a substantial American commitment to the survival of an anticommunist South Vietnam. · Intervention in South Vietnam was fully consistent with nearly 20 years of American foreign policy. · In August 1964, the president announced that American destroyers on patrol in international waters in the Gulf of Tonkin had been attacked by North Vietnamese torpedo boats. The Quagmire · There was a continuous stream of optimistic reports from American military commanders, government officials, and others. · The “attrition” was a strategy premised on the belief that the Unites States could inflict so many causalities and so much damage on the enemy that eventually they would be unable and unwilling to continue the struggle. · By the end of 1967, virtually every identifiable target of any strategic importance in North Vietnam had been destroyed. · Another crucial part of the American strategy was the “pacification” program, which was intended to push the Viet Cong from particular regions and then pacify those regions by winning the “hearts and minds” of the people. The War at Home · A series of “teach-ins” on university campuses, beginning at the University of Michigan in 196 sparked a national debate over the war before such debate developed inside the government itself. · Opposition to the war had become a central issue in left-wing politics and in the culture of colleges and universities. The Traumas of 1968 The Tet Offensive · On January 31, 1968, the 1st day of the Vietnamese New Year (TET), communist forces launched an enormous, concerted attack on American strongholds throughout South Vietnam. The Political Challenge · On March 31, Johnson went on television to announce a limited halt in the bombing of North Vietnam. The King and Kennedy Assassinations · On April 4, Martin Luther King Jr. was shot and killed while standing on the balcony of his motel. · In the days after the assassination, major riots broke out in more than 60 American cities. · Rober t Kennedy shaped what some would later call the “Kennedy Legacy”, a set of ideas that would for a time become central to American liberalism. · The passions Kennedy had aroused made his violent death a particularly shattering experience for many Americans. The Conservation Response · George Wallace established himself in 1963 as one of the nation's leading spokesmen for the defense of segregation. · As a governor of Alabama, he attempted to block the admission of black students to the University of Alabama. · In 1964, he has run a few Democratic presidential primaries and although had done surprisingly well, standing in the polls with 20%, he had no serious chance of winning the election.
  </body>
</html>
