<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2//EN">
<html>
<head>
<meta name="generator" content="HTML Tidy for Windows (vers 14 February 2006), see www.w3.org">
<title></title>
</head>
<body>
1)A Growing Economy a)Banking, Currency, and Protection i)War of 1812 stimulated manufacturing, but after war produced chaos in shipping and banking- need for new Bank of the United States charter its expiration 1811 and not renewed, protecting new industries, transport systems ii)After expiration of charter state banks offered difft currencies at difft values- confusion and counterfeiting. Congress passed new charter for Bank of US 1816- its size and power essentially forced state banks to issue safer currency iii)Manufacturing had grown tremendously due to imports being cut off, textile industry increased exponentially btwn Embargo of 1807 and War. Factories in NE no longer family operations. Francis Lowell developed new loom 1813 in Boston Manufacturing Company- first process of both spinning and weaving iv)After war English ships swarmed American ports, wanted to reclaim old markets with prices below cost. 1816 Congress passed tariff to protect “infant industries” from competition aboard- farmers objected b/c paid higher price b)Transportation i)W/o transport network manufacturers couldn’t access raw materials and send finished goods to markets in US- should fed govt finance roads? ii)1807 Jefferson’s Sec Treasury Albert Gallatin proposed revenue from Ohio land sale go to fund National Road. Crucial Lancaster Pike built in PA- both allowed for the beginning of transport of commodities like textiles iii)Steam-powered shipping (advancements of Robert Fulton) expanded on rivers and Great Lakes. Steamboats on Miss. stimulated already agricultural economy of South &amp; West b/c cost to transport products to market lowered iv)Despite progress of turnpikes + steamships serious gaps in trasportation. 1815 John Calhoun introduced bill to use federal funds to finance internal improvements, but Madison vetoed it in 1817 b/c believed unconstitutional v)Remained to state govts + private enterprise to build needed transit networks 2)Expanding Westward a)The Great Migrations i)Westward movement affected economy, factor in Civil War, peoples thrusted together. Pop. + econ. pressures, land availability, decreased Indian resistance ii)Immigration and natural growth increased Eastern population, agricultural lands occupied. Slaves in S limited work opportunity. West attractive b/c War of 1812 lessened Native opposition by pushing Indians west + establishing forts on Great Lakes and Miss. R., govt “factor system” of goods to Indians b)White Settlers in the Old Northwest i)Shelters primitive, clearings in forest for crops to supplement game and domestic animals, rough existence w/ poverty and loneliness ii)Migrants journeyed westward in groups, some formed communities and schools, churches, other institutions. Mobility a large part of life iii)Farm economy based on modest seized farms w/ grain cultivation + livestock c)The Plantation System in the Southwest i)Cotton longs in Old South had lost much fertility but market continued to grow for it, Black Belt of SW lands could support thriving cotton ii)First arrivals small farmers, wealthier planters followed buying and clearing smaller lands. Brought w/ them slaves, eventually mansions grew up from simpler log cabins symbolizing emergence of a newly rich class iii)Rapid growth in NW and SW resulted in new states after War of 1812: Indiana 1816, Mississippi 1817, Illinois 1818, Alabama 1819 d)Trade and Trapping in the Far West i)Trade began to develop btwn western regions in US in 19th century + beyond ii)Mexico (controlled Texas, CA, Southwest) won independence from Spain 1821, opened territories to trade in order to grow their fortunes. US merchants such as William Becknell displaced Indian traders and inferior Mexican products lost out to new US traders- Mexico lost its markets it in own colonies iii)Fur traders such as Jacob Astor’s American Fur Company eventually extended to Rockies, instead of pelts from Indians increasingly trapped their own iv)Trappers (“mountain men”) first wedge of white movement, changed society by interacting with Indians and Mexicans. 1822 Andrew and William Ashley founded Rocky Mountain Fur Company, recruited trappers to live permanently in Rockies (Utah, New Mexico) v)Lives of trappers bound up with expanding market economy- relied on fur companies for credit, depended on Eastern merchants for livelihood e)Eastern Images of the West i)Ppl in East only dimly aware of trappers’ world and their reshaping of it ii)Explorers dispatched by US govt to chart territories. 1819/1820 Steven Long sent by War Dept to explore, wrote influential report with dismissive conclusions for future settlement (like Zebulon Pike 15 yrs before) 3)The Era of Good Feelings 1. Second Bank of the United States (BUS II) 2. “infant industries” 3. Francis C. Lowell 4. National Road 5. Black Belt 6. William Becknell 7. Rocky Mountain Fur Company 8. Jedediah S. Smith 9. “Great American Desert” 10. “Presidential Jubilee” 11. Tallmadge Amendment 12. Thomas Amendment 13. Fletcher v. Peck 14. Dartmouth College v. Woodward 15. McCulloch v. Maryland 16. Gibbons v. Ogden 17. Johnson v. McIntosh 18. Worcester v. Georgia 19. “King Caucus” 20. The American System 21. “tariff of abominations” 22. “coffin handbill a)The End of the First Party System i)James Monroe, Madison’s Sec of State, elected Republican president 1816. W/ Federalist decline faced party faced no serious opposition, after War of 1812 no serious international threat- wanted republic w/o partisan factions ii)For Sec of State chose New Englander and former Federalist John Quincy Adams, John Calhoun named Sec of War- Monroe took pains to include northerners, southerners, easterners, westerners, Feds and Repubs in Cabinet iii)After election national goodwill tour, re-elected 1820 w/o any opposition b)John Quincy Adams i)Committed nationalist, important task promotion of American expansion ii)US already annexed W Florida, 1817 began negotiations w/ Spanish minister Lius de Onis. Meanwhile, American commander in Florida Andrew Jackson used orders from Sec of War Calhoun to invade Florida to stop Seminole raids—known as Seminole war. Adams wanted to use as excuse to annex iii)Onis realized he had little choice, Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819 ceded Florid and lands north of 42nd parallel to US, US gave up Texas claims c)The Panic of 1819 i)Panic followed period of high foreign demand for US goods, rising prices had stimulated land boom in western US. Availability for easy credit to settlers and speculators- from govt, state and wildcat banks ii)1819 management at Bank of US tightened credit, led to series of state bank failures, led to financial panic- those in West blamed it on bank iii)Depression for 6 years followed, but growth ultimately continued 4)Sectionalism and Nationalism a)The Missouri Compromise i)Missouri applied for statehood 1819, although slavery already established NY Rep James Tallmadge’s Amendment gradual emancipation- controversial ii)Since beginning new states had come into Union in pairs (1 from N, 1 from S), Missouri entrance would increase power of North over South iii)Maine had also applied for statehood, Henry Clay threatened South would block entrance in Missouri not permitted to be a slave state iv)Compromise in Maine-Missouri Bill, Senator Jesse Thomas’s Amendment to ban slavery in rest of Louisiana Ter. north of MO’s 3630’ border also passed b)Marshall and the Court i)John Marshall chief justice from 1801-1835. Strengthened judicial system at expense of executive and legislature, increased fed power over states, advanced interest of propertied and commercial classes ii)Supported inviolability contracts in Fletcher v. Peck (1810) which held GA legislature could not repeal contract acts of previous legislature. Dartmouth College v. Woodward (1819) affirmed constitutionality of federal review of state court decisions- states had given up some sovereignty by ratifying Constitution, therefore their courts must submit to federal jurisdiction iii)“Implied powers” of Congress upheld in McCulloch v Maryland (1819) by upholding Bank of United States, attorney Daniel Webster argued establishment legal under “necessary and proper” clause, power to tax involved “power to destroy”. States therefore could not tax now-legal Bank iv)Strengthened Congress’s power to regulate interstate commerce in Gibbons v Ogden (1824)- Fed govt gave license to Thomas Gibbons for ferry even transport btwn NY and NJ even though NY state had granted Aaron Ogden monopoly- Marshall argued that Congress’s power to regulate interstate commerce + navigation “complete in itself” + could exercise to the utmost v)Decisions established primacy of fed govt over states in regulating economy, protected corporations + private economic institutions from local govt c)The Court and the Tribes i)Marshall court decisions w/ Natives affirmed supremacy of US and carved out position for Native Americans within the constitutional structure ii)In Johnson v McIntosh (1825) Marshall described the basic right of Natives to tribal lands that preceded all other American law. Individual Americans could not buy or take land from tribes, only fed govt could do that iii)Worchester v Georgia (1832) invalidated law to regulate citizen access to Cherokee lands. Only fed govt had power to do that, tribes described as sovereign entities w/ exclusive authority and territorial boundaries iv)Marshall court did what Const had not- establish place for Indian tribes in American political system. Sovereign, but fed govt “guardian” over its “ward” d)The Latin American Revolution and the Monroe Doctrine i) US foreign policy mainly centered on Eur, but after War of 1812 Spanish Empire in decline w/ new revolutions, US developing profitable trade w/ Latin America rivaling GB as principal trading pattern ii)1815 US proclaimed neutrality in wars btwn Spain and rebellious colonies, 1822 President Monroe established diplomatic relations w/ 5 new nations iii)1823 Monroe announced policy (later known as “Monroe Doctrine”) that American continent not be considered subject of future colonization by European powers, any foreign challenge would be unfriendly iv)Monroe Doctrine developed b/c Americans feared Spanish allies (such as France) would aid it in retaking lost empire, fear of GB taking over Cuba 5)The Revival of Opposition a)The “Corrupt Bargain” i)In 1824 Republican caucus nominated William Crawford of Georgia for presidency, but other candidates received nominations from state legislatures ii)Candidates included: Sec of State John Quincy Adams had little popular appeal, Speaker of the House Henry Clay had personal following and strong program in the “American System” to strengthen home industry and Bank, Andrew Jackson little political experience but a military hero and TN allies iii)Jackson received more popular and electoral votes tan other candidates but not majority, Twelfth Amendment (passed after contested 1800 election) required House of Reps to choose among top three candidates- Clay threw endorsement behind Adams b/c Jackson a political rival in West + Adams a nationalist and likely American system supporter iv) Adams named Clay Sec of State, Jackson’s followers enraged at seeming “corrupt bargain”- haunted Adams throughout presidency b)The Second President Adams i)Adams proposed nationalist program reminiscent of Clay’s American System but Jacksonians in Congress blocked most of it. Southerners in Congress blocked delegates to international conference called by Simon Bolivar in Panama in 1826 b/c Haiti was sending black delegates ii)Georgia wished to remove remaining Creek and Cherokee Indians from state to gain more land for cotton planters. Adams refused to enforce treaty made btwn Indians + Georgia. Governor defied president and proceeded w/ removal iii)Adams supported tariff on imported goods 1828 b/c NE textile manufacturers complained of competition. To be passed concessions made to middle + west states on other tariffs—bill signed hated by all, called “tariff of abominations” c)Jackson Triumphant i)By 1828 presidential election new 2-party system had begun to emerge from divisions btwn Republicans. National Republicans supported John Quincy Adams and economic nationalism, opposing them was Democratic Republicans of Andrew Jackson who called for assault on privilege and widening of opportunity ii)Campaign of personal charges, Jackson’s wife Rachel accused of bigamy, she was so upset that she ultimately died- Jackson blamed opponents iii)Jackson won decisive but sectional victory. Adams strong in New England &amp; mid-Atlantic. Jackson believed victory similar to Jefferson’s 1800 win
</body>
</html>
